# Crafting Your First Cppfront Application


Back to Tutorial [home](../README.md)

Back to the Chapter [Overview](Overview.md)

Venturing into the realm of Cppfront for the first time? This concise chapter is tailored to provide you with a firsthand experience of crafting an application using Cppfront. It's a moment of realization, where the abstract concepts you've learned take shape in a tangible program. Here's a glimpse of the exciting journey ahead:

   - **Beginning with the Basics:** We kick off with an introduction to the pivotal "main:" function, the starting point of every Cppfront application.
   - **Arguments Unfolded:** Dive into the dynamics of program "args" and discover their instrumental role in enhancing the functionality of your programs.
   - **Tapping into the 'std' Library with `std::cout`:** No need for elaborate inclusions! Cppfront inherently integrates the vast "std" library, broadening your programming horizons. Unravel the simplicity of outputting data, enriched with the prowess of format specifications.
   - **Deciphering the C++ Blueprint:** Cppfront's beauty lies in its ability to transpile into C++. We'll sharpen your skills in decoding this generated C++, a cornerstone for those aspiring for an in-depth grasp of Cppfront.

So, gear up to witness the seamless fusion of elegance and power as you craft your first application in Cppfront!

## Embracing the New Syntax of Cppfront

Let's journey into the realm of Cppfront by starting with a classic 'Hello World' example. Imagine needing to write a simple program that takes a command line argument to customize a greeting. Here's how you'd accomplish that in Cppfront:

Cppfront:
```c++
main: (args) = {
	mytext: std::string = "welcome to Cppfront.";
	std::cout <<  "Hello (args[0])$, (mytext)$";
}
```

Several features immediately stand out in this example:

1. **Omitting Includes:** One of the first things you might notice is the absence of the `#include` directive. That's because Cppfront, for the user's convenience, automatically encompasses the Standard Library (`std`). This cuts down on boilerplate and fosters a cleaner code structure.

2. **The Essential 'main' Function:** Just as in C++, the 'main' function serves as the entry point to your application. In Cppfront, the signature takes a twist. The function name is presented first, followed by a colon, as in `main:`. Traditional `argc` and `argv` from C++ are elegantly collapsed into a single `args` parameter in Cppfront. This `args` is of type `args_t`, which essentially mirrors a vector containing all arguments as `string_view` (i.e., `std::vector<std::string_view>`).

3. **Function Declaration:** The general syntax for declaring functions in Cppfront goes like this: `[name]: ([params]) -> [return type] = {[function code]}`. While all functions follow this template, remember that parameters and return types can be optional. If a function doesn't return a value, you can conveniently omit the `-> [return type]` segment.

4. **Variable Declaration:** Within our 'main' function, we've declared a string variable named `mytext`. This declaration showcases the unique left-to-right syntax of Cppfront, echoing the function declarations. All variables generally adhere to the `[name]: [type] = [initial value]` format. However, it's worth noting that the type can be inferred from the initial value, allowing for a more concise `mytext:= "welcome to Cppfront."`.

5. **Formatted Output:** The concluding line sends a custom greeting to the standard output. What's striking here is Cppfront's built-in formatting mechanism. Using the `()$` attributes within the text, you can effortlessly embed variable values within your printed statements. This feature is known as Capture, and it's related to 'Lambda Captures'.

Each of these features adds layers of convenience, making Cppfront a compelling choice for those looking for modern syntax while retaining the power and familiarity of C++.

## Understanding the Transpilation Process

Below, you'll find the C++ code generated by the Cppfront transpiler from our earlier example:

C++:
```c++
//=== Cpp2 type declarations ====================================================

#include "cpp2util.h"

//=== Cpp2 type definitions and function declarations ===========================

#line 2 "tests.cpp2"
auto main(int const argc_, char** argv_) -> int;

//=== Cpp2 function definitions =================================================

#line 2 "tests.cpp2"
auto main(int const argc_, char** argv_) -> int{
 auto args = cpp2::make_args(argc_, argv_); 
#line 3 "tests.cpp2"
 std::string mytext {"welcome to Cppfront."}; 
 std::cout <<  "Hello " + cpp2::to_string(cpp2::assert_in_bounds(args, 0)) + ", " + cpp2::to_string(std::move(mytext));
}
```

A step-by-step breakdown:

- The C++ code consists of three distinct sections: 
	1. Type declarations
	2. Type definitions and function declarations
	3. Function definitions

- The first section introduces the inclusion of the `cpp2util.h` file, a crucial header containing definitions required by Cppfront for the transpiled code.

- The second section showcases the declaration of the `main` function. The preprocessor directive `#line 2 "tests.cpp2"` serves an important purpose: it guides the compiler (and debuggers) to connect the C++ code back to its original Cpp2 source. This ensures that any compiler error messages refer to the Cpp2 file, aiding in more intuitive troubleshooting.

- In the third section, the `main` function is detailed:
	- The `args` variable is both declared and initialized using the `cpp2::make_args` helper function—this is seamlessly injected by the transpiler.
	- The intuitive string formatting from the Cpp2 code is achieved using the `cpp2::to_string` function.
	- For safety, `cpp2::assert_in_bounds` is introduced by the transpiler to verify that array/vector accesses remain within bounds. If, for instance, an element that isn't in the vector (like `args[1]` in Cppfront) is accessed, the application will halt and provide a descriptive error:

```bash
Bounds safety violation: out of bounds access attempt detected
terminate called without an active exception
Aborted
```

By understanding this transpiled code, developers can bridge the gap between Cppfront's unique syntax and conventional C++ more effectively.

## Next

To the [next Chapter](Key_features.md). {style=text-align:center}

To the [previous Chapter](Installation_and_compilation.md).

Back to Tutorial [home](../README.md)

Back to the Chapter [Overview](Overview.md)

